FEA Add positive and negative likelihood ratios to metrics (#22518)
scikit-learn/scikit-learn: doc/modules/model_evaluation.rst

The :math:`LR_\pm` metrics are therefore very useful in settings where the data
available to learn and evaluate a classifier is a study population with nearly
balanced classes, such as a case-control study, while the target application,
i.e. the general population, has very low prevalence.

The positive likelihood ratio :math:`LR_+` is the probability of a classifier to
correctly predict that a sample belongs to the positive class divided by the
probability of predicting the positive class for a sample belonging to the
negative class:

.. math::

   LR_+ = \frac{\text{PR}(P+|T+)}{\text{PR}(P+|T-)}.

The notation here refers to predicted (:math:`P`) or true (:math:`T`) label and
the sign :math:`+` and :math:`-` refer to the positive and negative class,
respectively, e.g. :math:`P+` stands for "predicted positive".

Analogously, the negative likelihood ratio :math:`LR_-` is the probability of a
sample of the positive class being classified as belonging to the negative class
divided by the probability of a sample of the negative class being correctly
classified:

.. math::

   LR_- = \frac{\text{PR}(P-|T+)}{\text{PR}(P-|T-)}.

> :math:`LR_+` ranges from 1 to infinity and **higher is better**.
> :math:`LR_-` ranges from 0 to 1 and **lower is better**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For classifiers above chance :math:`LR_+` above 1 **higher is better**, while
:math:`LR_-` ranges from 0 to 1 and **lower is better**.
```

    and probability estimation." <https://drops.dagstuhl.de/opus/volltexte/2008/1382/>`_
    Dagstuhl Seminar Proceedings. Schloss Dagstuhl-Leibniz-Zentrum fr Informatik (2008).

.. _class_likelihood_ratios:

Class likelihood ratios
-----------------------

The :func:`class_likelihood_ratios` function computes the `positive and negative
likelihood ratios
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Likelihood_ratios_in_diagnostic_testing>`_ for
binary classes, which are further metrics derived from the
:func:`confusion_matrix` and that can be interpreted in terms of the pre-test
and post-test probabilities:

.. math::

   \text{sensitivity} = \frac{tp}{tp + fn},

.. math::

   \text{specificity} = \frac{tn}{tn + fp},

.. math::

   LR_+ = \frac{\text{sensitivity}}{1 - \text{specificity}} = \frac{tp \times
   (tn + fp)}{fp \times (tp + fn)},

.. math::

   LR_- = \frac{1 - \text{sensitivity}}{\text{specificity}} = \frac{fn \times

>    (tn + fp)}{tn \times (tp + fn)}.

Reviewer: I think that we should give the mathematical expression only below, and first focus on what the different values mean and how to interpret them. 

In scikit-learn docs, we tend to downplay mathematical formula, and push up meaning and intuitions.

Reviewer: We should rather start by way we would want to use this metric. And the reason is: because it is invariant to class prevalence and can be extrapolated between population with different class prevalence. I'll share with you privately a text that I wrote on this.

    and probability estimation." <https://drops.dagstuhl.de/opus/volltexte/2008/1382/>`_
    Dagstuhl Seminar Proceedings. Schloss Dagstuhl-Leibniz-Zentrum fr Informatik (2008).

.. _class_likelihood_ratios:

Class likelihood ratios
-----------------------

The :func:`class_likelihood_ratios` function computes the `positive and negative
likelihood ratios
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Likelihood_ratios_in_diagnostic_testing>`_
:math:`LR_\pm` for binary classes, which can be interpreted as the ratio of
post-test to pre-test odds as explained below. As a consequence, this metric is
invariant w.r.t. the class prevalence (the number of samples in the positive

> class divided by the total number of samples) and can be extrapolated between
> populations regardless of any possible class imbalance.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
class divided by the total number of samples) and **can be extrapolated between
populations regardless of any possible class imbalance.**
```
This is the most important information. Let's put it in bold.

The :math:`LR_\pm` metrics are therefore very useful in settings where the data
available to learn and evaluate a classifier is a study population with nearly
balanced classes, such as a case-control study, while the target application,
i.e. the general population, has very low prevalence.

The positive likelihood ratio :math:`LR_+` is the probability of a classifier to
correctly predict that a sample belongs to the positive class divided by the
probability of predicting the positive class for a sample belonging to the
negative class:

.. math::

   LR_+ = \frac{\text{PR}(P+|T+)}{\text{PR}(P+|T-)}.

The notation here refers to predicted (:math:`P`) or true (:math:`T`) label and
the sign :math:`+` and :math:`-` refer to the positive and negative class,
respectively, e.g. :math:`P+` stands for "predicted positive".

Analogously, the negative likelihood ratio :math:`LR_-` is the probability of a
sample of the positive class being classified as belonging to the negative class
divided by the probability of a sample of the negative class being correctly
classified:

.. math::

>    LR_- = \frac{\text{PR}(P-|T+)}{\text{PR}(P-|T-)}.

Reviewer: We should add somewhere (maybe here) in bold that the negative likelihood ratio is a metric where lower values mean better prediction.

Also, we should add that chance is roughly 1 for both of these metrics.

Author: Done

Notice that probabilities differ from counts, for instance
:math:`\operatorname{PR}(P+|T+)` is not equal to the number of true positive

> counts ``tp``. In fact, the class likelihood ratios can be expressed in terms of
> the `sensitivity and specificity
> <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sensitivity_and_specificity>`_, which are further
> metrics derived from the :func:`confusion_matrix`:
> 
> .. math::
> 
>    \text{sensitivity} = \frac{tp}{tp + fn},
> 
> .. math::
> 
>    \text{specificity} = \frac{tn}{tn + fp},
> 
> .. math::
> 
>    LR_+ = \frac{\text{sensitivity}}{1 - \text{specificity}} = \frac{tp \times
>    (tn + fp)}{fp \times (tp + fn)},
> 
> .. math::
> 
>    LR_- = \frac{1 - \text{sensitivity}}{\text{specificity}} = \frac{fn \times
>    (tn + fp)}{tn \times (tp + fn)}.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
counts ``tp`` (see `the wikipedia page <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Likelihood_ratios_in_diagnostic_testing>`_ for the actual formulas).
```

We should focus on the information important to our users (who are users, and not developers of machine-learning code) and avoid duplicating wikipedia because 1) it decreases maintenance (docs are like code: the more we have, the more maintenance), 2) it "crowds" the docs: people have a limited amount of time, and need to find information to make their decisions fast, if we put more information, it takes longer to find the relevant one.
